Franco-Sicilian Abstraction
transpositions, transitivity and transfer learning with
Lewis-Skyrms signaling games
Nathan Gabriel
University of California Merced April 6, 2025
Abstract
This paper shows how a rudimentary type of abstraction can obtain
in Lewis-Skyrms signaling games. Here, abstraction is understood as oc-
curring when different particulars take on the same functional role. Some
abstraction may be guided by innate biases, and the paper develops an
analogy of reasoning about strategic thinking in chess to highlight some
epistemic concerns that are raised by the presentation of abstraction. Con-
cretely, the signaling game models of this paper are developed in the con-
text of two tasks that are much simpler than strategizing in chess. The
first task is a transitive inference task that has been substantially studied
in both humans and non-human animals. General features of the models
developed for the transitive inference task are then carried over to a model
for the second task of learning rudimentary grammatical structures. This
second task is based on studies of human infants and non-human primates’
ability to learn “nonsense grammars”. Closing discussion highlights some
strengths of the abstraction exhibited in the Lewis-Skyrms signaling game
models.
1
1 Introduction
1 e4 c5 2 Nf3 e6 3 c3 d5
8 rmblkans
7 opZ0Zpop
6 0Z0ZpZ0Z
5 Z0opZ0Z0
4 0Z0ZPZ0Z
3 Z0O0ZNZ0
2 PO0O0OPO
1 SNAQJBZR
a b c d e f g h
In the above chess position, computer engines suggest that capturing the
d pawn, 4 e Xd5, is the best move. However, about 25% of the time, chess
masters instead advance the e pawn, 4 e5 . Why? “White is hoping a 1. . . c5
[Sicilian Defense] player won’t be comfortable in a French [Defense]. And that’s
also why Black often avoids the objectively best 4. . . Nc6 5 d4 and prefers a
gambit with 4. . . d4!? 5 c Xd4 c Xd4 6 Bb5+ N c6 7 Bc6+ bXc6 8 Qa4 or
6. . . Bd7 7 NXd4!?” (Soltis, 2007). In chess, a transposition occurs when a
sequence of moves begins with the moves of a particular opening, say a Sicilian
Defense, but results in a board position typical of a different opening, say a
French defense. When White sub-optimally advances her e pawn, she attempts
to transpose the game into a French Defense. If Black sub-optimally advances
her d pawn, she avoids the transposition at the cost of a pawn.
This story of chess transpositions serves dual analogical roles for this paper.
First, it demonstrates how we might think about the type of abstraction to be
described. While this paper explicates a specific and relatively simple example
of abstraction using transitive inference, the chess story highlights our ability
to use this type of abstraction in more complicated contexts. Consider Frege’s
conception of abstraction. According to him, we know the abstract form of a
sum by knowing that a particular formula is a sum, say 2+3=5, and seeing that
replacing any subset of the numbers in the formula with different numbers will
also yield a formula that is a sum (though, it is certainly not guaranteed that the
resulting formula’s reference is True). In this conception of abstraction we see
different particulars, numbers, can satisfy the same roles, an addend or result,
to make a summation formula. It is also the case that in Frege’s conception
of abstraction, we know exactly what particulars can be substituted into the
formula, any number and nothing that is not a number. While this may be
a good concept of abstraction in the context of formal languages, this paper
2
allows that there may be vagueness in the boundaries around what particulars
can satisfy the same role in an abstract category.
Chess masters use the abstract category of an opening to narrow the cal-
culations that they have to make. While a particular board position might
be novel, their familiarity with the abstract category of positions associated
with a particular opening guides what strategic ideas they consider (de Groot,
1978; Gobet et al., 2004). The fact that transpositions are possible entails that
some board positions might occupy a vague boundary between different cate-
gories of opening and associated strategic ideas. So when not discussing the
concrete Lewis-Skyrms signaling game to be presented, this paper’s discussion
of abstraction simply refers to contexts where different particulars take on the
same functional role. That is, just as two different numbers can play the role
of addends, two different board positions can play the role of reminding a chess
master of strategic ideas in the French Defense; but while we know exactly what
can and ought to play the role of an addend, there may be board positions oc-
cupying a vague boundary around the set of positions that are or ought to be
associated with strategic ideas in the French Defense. 1
Second, the story points us towards a philosophical problem that accom-
panies abstraction. Let’s suppose that we think beliefs that lead to success in
action are true beliefs. The chess story immediately shows why we might doubt
this. A player may believe 4 e5 is a stronger move than 4 e Xd5 due to her
having more success, i.e. more wins, with that continuation. However, this may
merely be a consequence of her having more successfully abstracted the strate-
gic dynamics of board positions associated with the French Defense than the
Sicilian; i.e. if your only tool is a hammer, then every problem looks like a nail.
As another example, one might think that we come to represent the world as
having three dimensional Euclidean structure by abstracting over experiences
and that since we successfully interact with the world using this representation,
then it is true that the world has this structure. But just because we success-
fully navigate the world representing it as Euclidean does not mean there is
not alternative representation with which we would have more success. Worse,
sections 3.3 and 3.4 will suggest that some abstractions may be a consequence
of (possibly arbitrary) innate dispositions rather than being wholly empirical. 2
Some research has investigated how humans store abstract information about
chess positions (Chassy, 2013). However, this paper focuses on simpler cogni-
tive tasks. This allows us to examine correspondingly simple models that are
more easily interpreted; in turn, this allows us to develop a clearer understand-
ing of the philosophical implications of the models rather then getting lost in
the details of continually evolving complex models. Accordingly, this paper
1See De Marzo and Servedio for a statistical clustering of board positions that coheres
with theoretical openings (De Marzo and Servedio, 2023).
2Explicitly, the worry is that if our representation of something in the world is reflective
of an arbitrary disposition, then this may entail that in some relevant way we understand
the world as having a particular structure when that structure is merely a consequence of
our arbitrary innate disposition. Some have, perhaps wrongly, interpreted Kant as having a
concern along these lines (Janiak, 2022; Warren, 1998).
3
models two tasks taken from the comparative psychology literature since we
take nonhuman animals to have less sophisticated cognitive resources available
for learning and inference. Of course, these tasks have also been studied with
human subjects who behave similarly to the nonhuman animal subjects that
succeed at the tasks.
The first task that is modeled is a transitive inference task, which involves
testing whether a subject trained on contiguous pairs of linearly ordered stim-
uli can abstract information about that relation to apply it two a novel non-
contiguous pair of stimuli. Psychology experiments have shown children as
well as a variety of nonhuman animals succeed at the transitive inference task.
Later discussion of this task, in accordance with the second analogical role of
the chess transpositions story, notes that expected behavior for the task should
not strictly be called “success” as the inference is not warranted.
The second task is a nonsense grammar task. It is a variation of experiments
habituating human infants and nonhuman primate infants to sound patterns,
called nonsense grammars, and testing whether the habituation persists for novel
sounds presented in the same patterns. While this is an entirely distinct task
from the transitive inference task, it can be similarly described: it tests whether
a subject trained on a relation between triplets of stimuli can abstract informa-
tion about that relation to apply it to a novel triplet of stimuli. This second
task is important for showing that the themes abstracted from the transitive
inference task are not merely consequences of particular details of that task.
2 Transitive Inference
Abstractly, transitive inference task is as follows: Five objects/stimuli are ar-
ranged in a serial order: A, B, C, D, E. The agent to be tested is conditioned
on adjacent pairs in the serial ordering through rewards for selecting the first
object in a presented pair. E.g. If presented with A-B the agent is rewarded for
choosing the item on the left. If presented with D-C the agent is rewarded for
choosing the item on the right. After the agent has learned to respond correctly
to pairs of objects that are adjacent in the serial order, she is then tested on
the non adjacent pairs B-D and D-B. ( A and E are not tested since choosing
A is always rewarded and choosing E is never rewarded; thus, choosing the left
object in the pair A-C might reflect choosing A always having been rewarded
rather than reflect the transitive ordering having been represented.) Choosing
the correct item in the non-adjacent pairing is then understood as the agent
representing the transitive ordering.
Concretely, Bryant and Trabasso showed that children ages 4-6 succeeded at
the transitive inference task. The stimuli used were rods of different colors and
varying lengths. The children were shown adjacent adjacent pairs, in a serial
ordering by length, were shown to the children, with the rods protruding through
holes such that one inch of the rod was visible. Thus the children could observe
the color of the rods, but not the length. After being asked which rod in a pair
was taller or shorter, the rods were removed and laid flat on a table in front
4
of the child so that they could examine whether they had answered correctly.
After the children learned to answer correctly for pairs that were adjacent in
the ordering by length, they were then test on non adjacent pairs and tended to
answer correctly. This experiment was taken to disprove earlier work by Piaget
who claimed that children did not understand or represent transitive relations
(Bryant and Trabasso, 1971).
Concretely, Gillan used colored plastic containers to show that chimpanzees
succeed at the transitive inference task. The colored containers were assigned an
arbitrary serial ordering and then adjacent pairs were presented to the chimps
with a food reward in whichever container was first in the serial ordering. After
the chimps were conditioned to almost always choose the container with the
food, they were then tested on the nonadjacent pairs. The result was that the
chimpanzees tended to chose the container that had food in it, i.e. the one
that was first in the serial ordering (Gillan, 1981). In a similar experiment, von
Fersen et al. showed Pigeons succeed at the transitive inference task using black
and white ink blots as the stimuli and and using a contraption that rewarded
the pigeons with food when they pecked at the correct ink blot in a pair (von
Fersen et al., 1991). Likewise, Davis showed that rats succeed at the transitive
inference task using the stimuli of distinct odors to mark pairs of doors that the
rats could open to retrieve a food reward (Davis, 1992). Bond et al. showed that
scrub-jays succeed at the transitive inference task using a mechanism similar to
von Feresen et al., but with projections of different colors of light rather than
ink blots as the stimuli (Bond et al., 2003).
It should be noted that, in the nonhuman animal experiments just listed,
the transitive inference is not warranted; e.g. food always being in the green
container when a green and yellow pair is presented and always being the the
yellow container when a yellow and red pair is presented does not entail that the
food will be in the green container when a green and red pair is presented. This
contrasts with Bryant and Trabasso’s study involving different colored rods of
varying lengths because transitivity does hold for length: i.e. if a green rod
is longer than a yellow rod and that yellow rod is longer than a red rod, then
this entails that the green rod is longer than the red rod. That the transi-
tive inference is warranted in the human experiment and unwarranted in the
nonhuman animal experiments is merely a coincidence of the experiments that
happened to comprise the most pertinent background information. There have
been experiments showing successful transitive inference in nonhuman animals
for which transitivity does hold for the stimuli, such as physical dominance, and
there have been experiments showing “successful” transitive inference in human
participants for which transitivity does not hold for the stimuli, such as char-
acters from a written language that the participants do not know (Grosenick
et al., 2007; Frank et al., 2005).
There have also been many computation models of transitive inference. Bar-
rett’s (Barrett, 2014) model is the most transparent. In Barrett’s model, agents
are first conditioned on a full serial ordering of stimuli including non-adjacent
pairs. The agents are then presented with a new set of serially ordered stimuli,
this time conditioned on only adjacent pairs. Modeling a type of transfer learn-
5
ing, the agents are allowed to transfer some of their dispositions from the first
set of stimuli to their dispositions for the new stimuli by allowing initial signals
transmitted for the new set of stimuli to be processed as if the signals were the
old stimuli. That is, the agents learn to map the new stimuli to their evolved
dispositions for the old stimuli, which now serve as an intermediary represen-
tation in an agent’s evolution of dispositions for the new stimuli. This allows
the agents to infer the appropriate response to a novel pairing of nonadjacent
stimuli from the new ordering most of the time.
Many computational models of transitive inference do not explicitly invoke
transfer learning. However, given that the correct action for the test pair is
underdetermined by the contiguous pairs that a model is trained on, some type
of prior bias must be present to explain successful action for the test pair.
For example, Siemann and Delius develop a model that makes use of lateral
inhibition, whereby, on the transmission of two signals, only the signal of larger
magnitude is acted upon. When presented with a stimulus pair from a serial
ordering, an agent might initially transmit both a signal to choose the left
object and a signal to choose the right object, but only the signal of greater
magnitude will go through (Siemann and Delius, 1998). On reflection, it is clear
that this is a type of transfer learning since the lateral inhibition mechanism is
itself a presupposed set of dispositions representing the serial ordering of signal
magnitudes. Other models are more opaque. De Lillo et al. give a three layer
neural network model, which, although not explicitly invoking lateral inhibition,
is trained using a cost function that always moves the weights in the direction
of hidden layer nodes always associating the rewarded stimulus with a greater
magnitude than the magnitude associated with the other stimulus in a pair (or
always with a smaller magnitude depending on the randomly determined initial
state of the network) (De Lillo et al., 2001). So this model might also be thought
of as presupposing a serially ordered representation. 3
3 Transitive Inference with Transfer Learning
This section presents three models of transitive inference by means of types
of learning that can be characterized as transfer learning. The first model is a
straightforward example of transfer learning. In this model, an agent first learns
to choose the preferred stimuli in a pair, being trained on both adjacent and non-
adjacent pairs in a serial ordering. Then, the dispositions from this first phase
of training are co-opted in a second phase. In this second phase of training an
agent is trained on only adjacent pairs in a new set of serially ordered stimuli.
Since this second phase of training involves mapping the new stimuli to the
dispositions formed in the first phase of training, agents subsequently succeed
3It is possible that this sort of prior bias could have evolved for an organism to navigate an
environment in which there is often a linear relation between objects. However, section 3.4 will
explain that such a bias could be a result of relatively abstract combinatorial properties. This
makes it plausible that the bias facillitating the inference is a spandrel rather than reflecting
environmental evolutionary pressures.
6
when tested on the non-adjacent pair for the new stimuli. This first model
is essentially the same as Barrett’s 2014 model, albeit with some negligible
differences (Barrett, 2014). Call this the “diachronic model”.
The primary purpose of the diachronic model is to simplify the presentation
and explanation of the other two models. Like the diachronic model, both of
these models make use of two sets of serially ordered stimuli. However, agents
are trained on both sets of stimuli simultaneously. Additionally, agents are
trained on pairings between the two sets of stimuli; e.g., let A, B, C, D, E be
the first set of stimuli and a, b, c, d, e be the second set of stimuli, then agents
are trained to choose B over c in a B-c pair. They are only trained on non-
adjacent pairings when both components of a pairing are from the first set of
stimuli. One of these models is a simple extension of the Diachronic Model in
its first phase of training while the other makes use of signal magnitudes. Call
these models the “synchronous model” and “synchronous magnitudes model”
respectively.
7
3.1 Diachronic Transfer
Figure 1: First Training Phase of Diachronic Model
The diachronic transfer learning model is a two sender one receiver game during
the first phase of training. Each sender see one of the two stimuli in a pair
composed of either adjacent or non-adjacent stimuli in the serial ordering. That
is, letting A, B, C, D, E be the stimuli in their serial order. Then every pairing
of two distinct stimuli is in the training set. The senders each have one urn
for each of the five stimuli that can be observed, and each urn begins the game
8
with a single ball of each type. Figure 1, depicts each sender with five types of
balls, but this is parameter in the model that can be varied. The receiver has
one urn for each of the possible combinations of signals that can be received
from the senders; each of these urns begins the game with two balls in it, a left
ball and a right ball. During the training, pairs are selected at random with
equal probability. Suppose, the pair B-D is selected. Then the left sender will
draw from her B urn and the right from her D urn. Suppose the left sender
draws a 2-ball and the right a 1-ball, then the receiver will draw from her 2-1
urn. The receivers draw then determines whether the left or the right stimuli
in the pairing will be chosen. If the correct stimmuli is chosen, in this case
B which is on the left, then the urns that were drawn from are reinforce with
additional balls of the type that were drawn. If the incorrect stimuli is chosen
than the urns are punished by removing balls of the type that were drawn, so
long as at least one ball of each type remains in each urn. This is the same basic
Roth-Erev reinforcement with punishment learning that has been described in
detail elsewhere and represented as (+1 , −1) (Barrett and Gabriel, 2022). The
notation (+r, −p) represents on a success adding r-many balls of the type drawn
to each of the urns drawn from, and on a failure removing p-many balls of the
type drawn from each of the urns drawn from, so long as at least one ball of
each type remains in each urn.
Figure 2: Second Training Phase of Diachronic Model
9
In the second phase of training (see Figure 2), the left and right senders are
given new urns, one for each of the new set of stimuli, a, b, c, d, e. Each of these
urns have ball types A, B, C, D, and E which then determine which urn from the
first phase of training will be drawn from. Draws from the urns the A, B, C, D,
and E urns then determine what is transmitted to the receiver who retains her
urns from the first phase of training. It is in this way that dispositions from the
first phase of training are co-opted in learning correct actions for the second set
of stimuli. Learning during the second phase of training also proceeds according
to Roth-Erev reinforcement with punishment learning dynamics. The testing
phase is then performed with the b-d and d-b pairs. No learning occurs during
the testing phase.
3.2 Synchronous Transfer
In the synchronous transfer model (see Figure 3), there is only one training
phase. The dynamics of the model are the same as the model in the first
phase of the training for the diachronic model. However, the training consists
in pairings from both the A, B, C, D, and E stimulus set and the a, b, c, d,
and e stimulus set. Pairings across the stimulus sets are allow, e.g. B-c. But
non adjacent pairs are only trained for stimuli from the first set, e.g. C-E.
There are no pairings in which both elements are occupy the same position in
the serial ordering, e.g. D-d is disallowed. So, A-D, B-A, d-C, and e-d are all
members of the training set and neither B-d nor a-d are member of the training
set. During training pairs from the training set are selected at random with
equal probability and the learning dynamics are the same as in the diachronic
model, i.e. Roth-Erev reinforcement with punishment. After the training phase
is complete, the testing phase consists of the b-d and d-b pairs and no learning
occurs during testing.
10
Figure 3: Synchronous Model. For simplicity, this model is depicted with each of
a sender’s urns containing five ball types. However this is a parameter that can be
varied. The results section focuses on simulation results for which each urn contained
ten ball types.
11
3.3 Synchronous Magnitudes
In the synchronous magnitudes model (see Figure 4), the training and testing
sets are the same as in the synchronous model. Likewise there is only a single
training phase before the testing phase. The only difference in the synchronous
magnitudes model is in the senders’ urns. Rather than the senders each having a
single urn for each of the stimuli that can be observed, each stimuli is associated
with M-many urns with each of these urns beginning the game with one 0 ball
and one 1 ball. Figure 4 depicts the model with M=6, though later results are
reported for M=10. When a stimuli is observed by one of the senders, that
sender draws from every urn associated with that stimulus and then transmits
the sum of her draws. For example, if the left sender, upon seeing A draws five
1 balls and one 0 ball, then she will transmit 5; if the right sender upon seeing
B draws two 1 balls and four 0 balls, she will transmit 2; then the receiver will
draw from the 5-2 urn just as she would in the prior models. Again, the learning
dynamics is urn based reinforcement with punishment. Thus if, in the example
just given, the correct stimuli was chosen, then the left sender would reinforce
1 balls in the five urns that she drew 1 balls from and reinforce 0 balls in the
urn that she drew the 0 ball from. Likewise the right sender would reinforce 1
balls in the two urns that she drew 1 balls from and reinforce 0 balls in the four
urns that she drew zero balls from.
12
Figure 4: Synchronous Magnitudes Model. For simplicity, this model is depicted with
each sender having six urns for each stimuli that can be observed. However, this is
a parameter that can be varied. The results section focuses on simulation results for
which senders have ten urns for each stimuli that can be observed.
3.4 Transitive Inference Simulation Results
The diachronic model performs very poorly. Running simulations for a variety
of parameters never yielded a significantly high mean success rate during just
the first phase of training. As stated earlier, the primary purpose of the di-
13
achronic model is as a stepping stone towards the synchronous and synchronous
magnitudes models. Barrett (Barrett, 2014) achieves significantly high success
rates with a similar model by utilizing invention in the learning dynamics. This
limits the terms available to the senders to only those that have led to suc-
cess in action, and this limitation makes learning much easier. As will be seen,
the synchronous magnitudes model will yield a similar increase in success rates
by making the middle magnitude the most likely magnitude to be transmitted
during the early stages of a simulation.
For the synchronous model, with ten ball types in each of the senders’ urns,
using (+4, -11) reinforcement with punishment, and 2×109 training plays before
testing yeilded a mean success rate of 0.7228 during training and a mean success
rate of 0.66293 during testing. However, the simulations also yeilded a very odd
result when training was restricted to just the second set of stimuli and only
training on adjacent pairs. The model still performed above chance during the
testing phase. Simulations had a mean success rate of 0.7256 during training
and 0.6217 for the testing phase. 4
What is even more confusing is that, prima face, it seems that combinatori-
ally we should expect performance during testing to be worse than chance when
restricting training to just the second set of stimuli with only adjacent pairings
in the training set. For the five stimuli in the second training set and ten terms
in each of the senders urns there are essentially 831,847,680 strategy profiles for
which every pairing in the training set gets mapped to the correct action and
pairings in the test set tend to get mapped to the incorrect action, but there are
only 766,177,920 strategy profiles for which every pairing in the training set gets
mapped to the correct action and pairings in the test set tend to get mapped
to the correct action.5 Thus, it seems like mean success rates for the test pairs
should be less than 0.5 when the training phase only consists of the second set
of stimuli and the training set only consists of adjacent pairings. The resolution
to this problem lies in observing that for strategy profiles that map at least two
distinct pairings to the same receiver urn, there are only 78,943,680 strategy
profiles for which every pairing in the training set gets mapped to the correct
action and pairings in the test set tend to get mapped to the incorrect action,
there are 137,649,600 strategy profiles for which every pairing in the training set
4This is averaging over just 300 simulations as 2×109 training plays takes a decent amount
of time to simulate.
5This is brushing over some details. By using the term ‘essentially’, what is indicated
that this count is of pure strategy profiles rather than mixed strategy profiles. So whats really
being counted are the pure strategy profiles that a simulation could converge to rather than
the mixed profiles that necessarily obtain (since the learning dynamics require that there is
always at least one ball of each type in each urn). The count of 831,847,680 is of pure strategy
profiles such that every adjacent pairing is mapped to the correct action and where at least
one of the b-d or d-b pair is mapped to the incorrect action and neither is mapped to the
correct action. Likewise, the count of 766,177,920 is of pure strategy profiles such that every
adjacent pairing is mapped to the correct action and where at least one of the b-d or d-b
pair is mapped to the correct action and neither is mapped to the incorrect action. There are
203,400,360 pure strategy profiles such that every adjacent pairing is mapped to the correct
action and exactly one of the b-d or d-b pair is mapped to the correct action and the other is
mapped to the incorrect action.
14
gets mapped to the correct action and pairings in the test set tend to get mapped
to the correct action, and the learning dynamics makes these strategy profiles
much more likely to obtain (since it is easy for the senders dispositions towards a
pairing, for which successful dispositions have not yet been reinforced, to evolve
a mapping to a receiver urn for which successful dispositions have already been
reinforced for a distinct pairing). 6
For the synchronous magnitudes model, with senders having ten urns for
each of the stimuli, using (+4, -11) reinforcement with punishment, and 10 7
training plays before testing yielded a mean success rate of 0.999 during train-
ing and a mean success rate of 0.845 during testing; 635 simulations of 1000 had
a success rate greater than 0.9 for the testing phase. When restricting training
to only the second set of stimuli and only training on adjacent pairs, simula-
tions had a mean success rate of 0.999 during training and 0.734 during testing.
Again, the explanation for this better than chance performance when only train-
ing adjacent pairings from the second set of stimuli seems to be the learning
dynamics tendency to produce strategy profiles in which multiple pairings get
mapped to the same receiver urn. 7
The synchronous magnitudes model can be thought of as baking some or-
dered structure into the model since there is an ordered relation between the
magnitudes that can be transmitted: in the initial state of the model, for any
stimuli, if there are ten urns per stimuli, then the most likely magnitude to be
transmitted by each sender is 5 and the least likely transmissions are 0 and 10;
furthermore, once a disposition to transmit some magnitude, say 7, has been
reinforced, then the most likely deviations from this transmission are 6 and 8
6Precisely, this explanation needs to be more nuanced for the synchronous model since it
was rare for strategy profiles with training phase success rates near 1.0 to obtain. However,
this nuance is unnecessary when considering the synchronous magnitudes model for which the
learning parameters reported in the next paragraph yielded training phase success rates near
1.0 for every simulation. Here, combinatorially, only 12%, of strategy profiles for which every
pairing in the training set gets mapped to the correct action and at least one of the b-d or
d-b pairs gets mapped to the same urn as one of the pairs from the training set, are such
that at least two pairs from the training set get mapped to the same receiver urn. However,
in simulations about 40% of the final strategy profiles have this property. Moreover, for the
synchronous model, only 13.6% of strategy profiles for which every pairing in the training set
gets mapped to the correct action and at least one of the b-d or d-b pairs gets mapped to the
same urn as one of the pairs from the training set, are such that at least two pairs from the
training set get mapped to the same receiver urn. However, in simulations 60% of the final
strategy profiles have this property.
7As stated in a prior footnote, only 12%, of strategy profiles for which every pairing in
the training set gets mapped to the correct action and at least one of the b-d or d-b pairs
gets mapped to the same urn as one of the pairs from the training set, are such that at least
two pairs from the training set get mapped to the same receiver urn. However, in simulations
about 40% of the final strategy profiles have this property. This is close, but not entirely
sufficient for explaining the 0.734 mean success rate during testing. It could be that some
amount of transitivity is baked into the model or simply that further investigation of the
combinatorial properties of the game reveals further insight. While the number of strategy
profiles that have at least two pairs being mapped to the same receiver urn were counted, it
could be that strategy profiles with strictly more than two pairs being mapped to the same
receiver urn obtain and that these profiles are even more biased towards the testing pair being
mapped to the correct action.
15
rather than all alternative transmissions be equally likely as in the synchronous
model. These properties of magnitudes can be thought of as reflecting neurons
having a base firing rate that is then increased or decreased by learning events
or can even be thought of as a potential spandrel, a la Gould and Lewontin,
simply resulting from the connectivity of neurons (Gould and Lewontin, 1979).
Two variations of the synchronous magnitudes mode were simulated to en-
sure undue structure was not being baked into the model. First, it was trained
on a single set of stimuli, a, b, c, d, and e being conditioned to choose according
to the regular ordering for adjacent pairs, but the reverse order for non-adjacent
pairs; e.g. for the pair c-b, choosing right was reinforced and choosing left was
punished, and for the pair a-d, choosing right was reinforce and choosing left
was punished. This variant was successfully learned with a mean success rate
of 0.998 across simulations. Second, a variant was explored where for single set
of stimuli, a, b, c, d, and e training on only adjacent pairs reinforced choosing
according to the serial ordering, but training also included an additional stimuli
x, such that choosing left for e-x, right for x-e, right for a-x, and left for x-a
were reinforced. That is, the model was trained on adjacent pairs in a circular
rather than linear ordering. This yielded a mean success rate of 0.999. So, it
seems clear that the model is perfectly capable of representing relations other
than linear transitive orderings.
The circular ordering variant of the synchronous magnitudes model is notable
because it actually reflects an experiment that was performed with pigeons.
Von Fersen et al. in their black and white ink blots version of the transitive
inference task hypothesized that the pigeons were relying on a type of analogue
magnitude representation, called value transfer, during training and that this
explained their success during the testing phase. Thus they predicted that it
would not be possible to condition the pigeons on adjacent pairs according to
a circular ordering. Contrary to their prediction two of three pigeons did learn
the circular ordering (von Fersen et al., 1991). So the synchronous magnitudes
model shows how the pigeons may have relied on magnitudes for learning yet
still been able to represent a circular ordering.
4 Transferring to Abstraction
As previously stated, this paper’s discussion of abstraction simply refers to
contexts where different particulars take on the same functional role. In the
transitive inference task, we can see a simulation has learned to attribute the
same functional role to stimuli from each serial ordering that occupy the same
place in their respective ordering if the final dispositions are such that the cor-
rect stimuli are chosen in the b-d and d-b test pairs (as already reported, this
occurred roughly 63% of the time for the simultaneous magnitudes model). To
make this claim concrete, suppose there are five ancient coins each with a head
and tail side. Suppose further that the coins are serially ordered by value and
that a subject is unfamiliar with the coins, i.e. upon seeing the heads side of
a coin she cannot tell you what the tails side looks like and vice versa. In this
16
scenario, the stimuli of a coin’s head or tail is equally capable of fulfilling the
functional role of indicating where in the serial ordering the coin is. Now, we
could describe a deductive process by which the subject upon learning the or-
dering of the coins according the head sides and having more limited exposure
to information about the tail sides deduces which tail stimuli occupies the same
place in the ordering as each head stimuli. However, what the models show
is how simple associative processes can also lead to different particular stimuli
occupying the same functional role. The fact that the model has no prior ex-
posure to the b-d and d-b pairs shows that it is actually dispositions from the
first serial ordering to the second rather than merely independently learning the
appropriate dispositions for each set of stimuli.
It is also clear that the different particular transitive inference models pre-
sented accomplish this abstraction in the same way. The receiver urns are
organized in the same way for all three models. This in conjunction with hav-
ing separate left and right senders who condition their action on just a single
stimulus in a pair allows signaling systems to obtain that exhibit already re-
inforced dispositions towards novel stimulus pairings. As will be seen in the
following section, this type of model architecture can accomplish abstraction in
tasks other than transitive inference.
5 Nonsense Grammar
In a series of papers documenting experiments on cotton-top tamarins ( Sagui-
nus oedipus ) and human infants, Hauser et al. claimed to have shown that
the cognitive mechanisms for processing complex grammatical structures was
uniquely human (Hauser et al., 2002b, 2001; Saffran et al., 2008). Critically, the
content of these papers was used to support arguments in the prolific “Faculty
of Language” paper he co-authored with Chomsky and Fitch (Hauser et al.,
2002a). It must be noted that Hauser falsified data in at least one of these pa-
pers, making human infants appear to be more competent than the cotton-top
monkeys at processing particularly complex grammatical structures. However,
data on simpler grammatical structures seems to be accurate and has been in-
dependently replicated by Neiworth et al. (Neiworth et al., 2017). The most
relevant of these experiments by Neiworth et al. is summarized in the following
paragraph.
The ability to learn simple grammatical patterns was assessed using a habit-
uation paradigm with 16 adult cotton-tops as subjects. During a habituation
phase, cotton-tops were exposed to consonant vowel sequences in an 001 or 011
pattern, e.g. “pupuki” or “pukiki”. Seven different consonants (p, b, d, k, t,
m, and n) and two vowels (i and u) were used to make the consonant vowel
sounds that composed the 001 and 011 sequences. After a group of two or three
monkeys was exposed consonant vowel sequence in only the 001 pattern or only
the 011 pattern, a testing phase consisted in novel consonant vowel sounds (e.g.
“wa”, “ji”, “la”, “ri”) arranged in sequences of both the same pattern that had
been habituated and the alternative pattern. For example, if the 001 pattern
17
was habituated, the monkeys might be tested on “lalari” as the same pattern
and “wajiji” as the alternative pattern. Whether the same or alternative pat-
tern was presented first was varied from group to group. The result was that
the monkeys spent significantly more time looking towards the novel sounds in
the alternative pattern than the novel sounds in the same pattern. This was
interpreted as the monkeys becoming habituated to the pattern from the ha-
bituation phase and being capable of detecting the differences between the two
nonsense grammars.
The details of the nonsense grammar model that follow differ from the com-
parative psychology experiment that inspired the model, but follow the exper-
iment in spirit. In the nonsense grammar model, four nonsense grammars are
considered: (i) 000, (ii) 001, (iii) 011, and (iv) 010. Sequences are composed of
five different stimuli (A, B, C, D, E) arranged in one of the four nonsense gram-
mar patterns. During training, sequences are selected at random with equal
probability to be classified as (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv). The training set contains
all sequences except those that contain stimuli D or E in pattern (iv). Then,
in the testing phase, it is checked whether the sequences DED and EDE are
successfully classified as pattern (iv).
The model’s architecture, depicted in Figure 5, is essentially the same as
the synchronous model. The only real difference is that there are three senders
rather than two, the receiver correspondingly has urns indexed by three terms
rather than two, and the receiver’s urns begin the game with one ball of each
of four types (one for each grammar type that a sequence can be classified
as). While depicted with each sender’s urns containing five different ball types,
results are reported for each sender’s urns containing ten different ball types.
18
Figure 5: Synchronous Nonsense Grammar Model. For simplicity, this model is
depicted with each of a sender’s urns containing five ball types. However this is a
parameter that can be varied. The results section focuses on simulation results for
which each urn contained ten ball types.
19
For the synchronous nonsense grammars model, simulations were run using
[+4, -10] reinforcement with iterated punishment and 10 7 training plays before
testing (see Barrett and Gabriel for an explanation of reinforcement with iter-
ated punishment (Barrett and Gabriel, 2022)). During the training phase, all
simulations achieved a success rate above 0.85 and 91.1% of runs had a success
rate greater than 0.99. During testing, nearly all simulations (96.9%) had a
success rate better than chance (0.25), 58.1% of simulations had a success rate
greater than 0.75, and 33.5% of simulations had a success rate greater than 0.9.
So, a significant number of simulations correctly classified the test sequences.
6 Discussion
The models presented in this paper show how a low level associative learning
dynamics, specifically Roth-Erev reinforcement with punishment and reinforce-
ment with iterated punishment, can be employed to succeed at both the transi-
tive inference task and the nonsense grammar task. In all of the models, success
involved different stimuli getting mapped to the same intermediary variable,
i.e. the same receiver urn. 8 For example, the stimuli pairs B-D and b-d can
be mapped to the same receiver urn, transferring the successfully conditioned
dispositions towards B-D to b-d. This only happens if the left sender transmits
the same signal for B as she does for b, and likewise the right sender sends the
same signal for D and d. Concretely, this may look like an agent learning to
associate the head side of a coin, call it B, with the same dispositions as the
tail side of the same coin, b. In this way, a rudimentary type of abstraction is
realized in the models when they evolve successful dispositions; different par-
ticular stimuli play the same functional role of eliciting the appropriate action.
This is analogous to different particular board positions guiding chess masters
to the same strategic ideas in virtue of the, potentially novel, board positions
being associated with the same opening.
Abstraction provides significant heuristic utility to finite boundedly rational
agents. Chess masters would have no use for abstract categories of openings if
they had the capacity to calculate every possible continuation of a board posi-
tion. In fact, reliance on this sort of abstraction and chunking of common piece
configurations, while common amongst human players, is virtually non-existent
in computer chess engine methods of position evaluation (Gobet et al., 2004).
However useful, abstraction’s role as a heuristic carries with it epistemic con-
cerns. This paper’s introduction gave an example of how a person’s familiarity
with success playing the against the French Defense may lead to a suboptimal
transposition from the Sicilian into a French. 9 If humans had unlimited cog-
nitive resources, a chess master could take into account strategic ideas for all
8The term “intermediary variable” is used here in accordance with Marr’s account of the
algorithmic level of explanation (Marr, 2010).
9Specifically, this is objectively a suboptimal transposition for white when black is equally
capable of playing a French or Sicilian. It is only in service of illustrating the epistemic concern
that this paragraph ignores the possibility that white is making a strategic bet that black is
less comfortable in French positions than Sicilian positions.
20
openings in a given board position rather than only those associated with a
particular opening. Masters can also fail to notice a transposition leading to
evaluating a position according to a suboptimal set of strategic considerations
(Soltis, 2007).10
Building on the chess analogy, the synchronous magnitudes model illustrates
how abstraction can be facilitated by innate biases and we can worry that such
biases lead us to systematically misrepresent the world. Now it could be that
an organism is innately (and possibly for arbitrary reasons) biased towards rep-
resenting things in its environment as linearly ordered because it evolved in an
environment where it was adaptive to represent as being linearly ordered. But it
seems equally plausible that such a bias could be a spandrel of neuron connectiv-
ity.11 Regardless of whether an innate bias is a result of environment pressures
or an accidental consequence of some other adaptive trait, it is an open question
whether that bias leads to systematic misrepresentation of the world. If objects
in an environment are typically linearly related, an organism biased towards
representing things as linearly related might represent those few things that are
not linearly related as being linearly related. If an organism is innately biased
towards represent things as linearly related for arbitrary reasons, it might still
be able to represent things as not being linearly related; e.g. results showed that
the simultaneous magnitudes model could learn a non-linear relation between
the stimuli when conditioned to choose according to one ordering for contiguous
stimuli but according to the reverse ordering for noncontiguous stimuli.
It seems that there are a couple viable responses to a generic worry that
abstraction facilitated by innate biases puts us in an epistemically precarious
position. First, it is true that the synchronous magnitudes model demonstrates
how abstraction can be facilitated by some, perhaps arbitrary, innate bias. How-
ever, it is also the case that the model demonstrated an ability to represent a
non linear relation despite its bias towards representing things as linearly or-
10Similar epistemic concerns can be raised for chunking of piece configurations. While
there may be principles that are generally true of some common piece configurations, those
principles need not hold for all positions. It is said that “a knight on the rim is dim”,
referencing the general principle that it is typically a mistake to move a knight to the edge
of a board, say a5, because on the edge the knight can only control four squares rather than
the eight it can control in the center of the board and also because, compared to a bishop,
rook or queen, a knight requires substantially more moves to transition from attacking one
side of the board to the other. But this principle might be violated if it allows the knight to
be exchanged for a more valuable piece. Nimzovich dedicates the entire second part of his
iconic book, My System , to analyzing common piece configurations (Nimzovich, 1964). What
me might worry is that we are innately disposed only condition our judgments on a strict
subset of relevant piece configurations. For example, novice chess players often find it easier
to analyze the linear movement of the bishop than the non-linear movement of the knight and
consequently systematically miss important strategic considerations involving knights. This
might reflect a general bias towards representing things as being linearly related. It is an open
empirical question whether chess masters’ chunking of piece configurations is such that they
systematically make suboptimal judgments when certain piece configurations occur.
11In defense of this claim, it might be noted that the architecture of the synchronous
magnitudes model was not intended to exhibit a bias towards linearly ordered representations.
Upon discovery of this bias, the author’s first response was to look for an error in the model’s
code.
21
dered. Recall that the model was successfully trained to chose according to the
regular ordering when presented with adjacent pairs, but also conditioned to
chose according to the reverse ordering when presented with nonadjacent pairs;
for example, choosing left was rewarded when presented with the pair a-b or
b-c, but choosing right was rewarded when presented with the pair a-c.
By analogy, suppose we found some species that succeeded on the transitive
inference task with minimal training, but was so innately biased towards linear
representation that the species could not be conditioned to correctly choose the
winner in rock paper scissors (i.e. conditioned to chose left for the pairs rock-
scissors, scissors-paper, and paper-rock as well as conditioned to chose right for
the pairs scissors-rock, paper-scissors, and rock-paper). The species continued
survival is indicative of it generally representing the world well enough sustain
itself and procreate. But in the context of rock paper scissors, the species
is a miserable failure. Upon discovering that some way in which we abstract
information is facilitated by some innate bias, we can worry that perhaps we are
like this species there is some niche context in which we are miserable failures.
Given our generally proficient navigation of the world we might be entirely blind
to our failure in this niche context. We might simply represent such contexts as
being governed by random chance rather than a recognizable pattern.
What the synchronous magnitudes model shows is that such worries can be
too hasty. Abstraction can be facilitated by an innate bias in conjunction with
enough flexibility in the learning mechanism to represent the world as contrary
to the bias if necessary. Novice chess players often find it easier to understand
tactics involving the bishop which moves linearly compared to tactics involving
the knight which does not move linearly. It could be that this reflects some
innate bias towards linear representation, but it would be wrong to conclude
that we are incapable of appropriately representing tactics involving knights. 12
Beyond highlighting the fact that the synchronous magnitudes model is able
to represent things as being contrary to its innate bias given the appropriate
training, it is worth considering the power of accomplishing abstraction through
low level associative learning. What the models in this paper show is how
minimal the preconditions for abstracting from experience can be. If we were
to give a linguistic description of how one might abstract a serial ordering from
pairs or a grammatical relation from triplets, it would be difficult to do so
without using language that appears to presuppose some prior representation
of the type of relation that is being learned. 13 But the dynamics of the models
previously described need not operate at the coarseness of the language used
to describe them. The model does not need to first reliably choose left for an
12Anecdotally, it is well known that novices struggle more with the knight than the bishop.
As far as academic research goes, Gobet et al. (2004) does make explicit claims that the
power of the bishop pair in open positions is more easily understood by humans than queen
and knight vs queen and bishop citing Sturman (1996) in support of this claim. But, the
evidence is weak, essentially amounting to anecdotes from world champion Capablanca and
Grand Master Timoshchenko.
13This mirrors an interpretation of one of Kant’s arguments that our representation of space
cannot be empirical because in order to abstract the concept of space from relations between
objects occupying space we first have to represent them as such (Janiak, 2022; Warren, 1998).
22
A-B pair before those dispositions can be co-opted for learning to choose left in
response to observing the a-b pair. Those joint dispositions can grow gradually
and simultaneously.
To conclude, this discussion has not argued that our inferences guided by
abstraction and biases are always warranted. We can always worry that we
are suboptimally advancing a pawn. However, there are some reasons to be
optimistic about our use of abstraction. Abstraction can be a useful heuristic
tool for navigating a complex world (or complex chess positions). Furthermore,
while it may be facilitated by some biases, there is also evidence that those biases
can be overcome. Finally, it was suggested that abstraction through associative
learning has the benefit of requiring minimal preconditions for learning when
compared to explicit symbolic reasoning.
23
References
Barrett, J. A. (2014). Rule-following and the evolution of basic concepts. Phi-
losophy of Science , 81(5):829–839.
Barrett, J. A. and Gabriel, N. (2022). Reinforcement with iterative punishment.
Bond, A. B., Kamil, A. C., and Balda, R. P. (2003). Social complexity and
transitive inference in corvids. Animal Behaviour, 65(3):479–487.
Bryant, P. E. and Trabasso, T. (1971). Transitive inferences and memory in
young children. Nature, 232:456–458.
Chassy, P. (2013). The role of memory templates in experts’ strategic thinking.
Journal of Psychology Research, 3(5):276–289.
Davis, H. (1992). Transitive inference in rats (rattus norvegicus). Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 106(4):342–349.
de Groot, A. D. (1978). Thought and choice in chess . Mouton, 2nd edition.
De Lillo, C., Floreano, D., and Antinucci, F. (2001). Transitive choices by a
simple, fully connected, backpropogation neural network: Implications for the
comparative study of transitive inference. Animal Cognition, 4(1):61–68.
De Marzo, G. and Servedio, V. D. (2023). Quantifying the complexity and
similarity of chess openings using online chess community data. Scientific
Reports, 13.
Frank, M. J., Rudy, J. W., Levy, W. B., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2005). When
logic fails: Implicit transitive inference in humans. Memory & Cognition ,
33(4):742–750.
Gillan, D. J. (1981). Reasoning in the chimpanzee: Ii. transitive inference. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes , 7(2):150–164.
Gobet, F., de Voogt, A., and Retschitzki, J. (2004). Moves in mind: The
Psychology of Board Games . Psychology Press.
Gould, S. J. and Lewontin, R. C. (1979). The spandrels of san marco
and the panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences ,
205(1161):581–598.
Grosenick, L., Clement, T. S., and Fernald, R. D. (2007). Fish can infer social
rank by observation alone. Nature, 445(7126):429–432.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., and Fitch, W. T. (2002a). The faculty of language:
What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298(5598):1569–1579.
24
Hauser, M. D., Newport, E. L., and Aslin, R. N. (2001). Segmentation of the
speech stream in a non-human primate: Statistical learning in cotton-top
tamarins. Cognition, 78(3):B53–B64.
Hauser, M. D., Weiss, D., and Marcus, G. (2002b). Rule learning by cotton-top
tamarins. Cognition, 86:B15–B22.
Janiak, A. (2022). Kant’s views on space and time.
Marr, D. (2010). Vision: A computational investigation into the human repre-
sentation and processing of visual information . MIT Press.
Neiworth, J. J., London, J. M., Flynn, M. J., Rupert, D. D., Alldritt, O.,
and Hyde, C. (2017). Artificial grammar learning in tamarins (saguinus
oedipus) in varying stimulus contexts. Journal of Comparative Psychology ,
131(2):128–138.
Nimzovich, A. (1964). My system, a treatise on chess . D. McKay Co.
Saffran, J., Hauser, M., Seibel, R., Kapfhamer, J., Tsao, F., and Cushman,
F. (2008). Grammatical pattern learning by human infants and cotton-top
tamarin monkeys. Cognition, 107(2):479–500.
Siemann, M. and Delius, J. D. (1998). Algebraic learning and neural network
models for transitive and non-transitive responding. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 10(3):307–334.
Soltis, A. (2007). Transpo tricks in chess. Batsford.
Sturman, M. (1996). Beware the bishop pair. ICGA Journal, 19(2):83–93.
von Fersen, L., Wynne, C. D., Delius, J. D., and Staddon, J. E. (1991). Tran-
sitive inference formation in pigeons. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 17(3):334–341.
Warren, D. (1998). Kant and the apriority of space. Philosophical Review,
107(2):179–224.
25
